
CRIM hearing (Chair: Ms Eva Joly)

Tuesday, 19 March 2013, 9.00-12.30


Joint CRIM-DEVE hearing on organised crime, corruption and money laundering: The impact on development


Cluster II

Combating corruption and bribery of public officials in

developing countries


OLAF Speaker: Dr Petra Kneuer Director A of OLAF

"Fighting and preventing corruption in developing countries from an EU perspective"

Presentation
Good morning Ms Joly, good morning Ladies and Gentlemen, First of all, I would like to express my appreciation to the European Parliament and in particular to Ms Eva Joly for this invitation, which allows me to participate in this interesting forum in which the problem of corruption, connected to organised crime and money laundering will be addressed. I am also very pleased to speak on behalf of the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF). I have been an OLAF Director since December 2012 - responsible for the investigations concerning this specific area. As you know, OLAF is a key player by means of investigative actions in fighting corruption and aims at making its operational results constantly more effective.

Introduction

I was asked to share with you OLAF's experiences in "fighting and preventing corruption in developing countries from an EU perspective".

Why does corruption matter? Why do we need to fight or prevent corruption in developing countries?

Well, corruption is estimated to cost European Tax Payers some 120bn Euros per year, which is about 1% of the EU's gross domestic product.

Corruption is present in almost every country. And has the most devastating effects in developing economics, because it hinders any advance in economic growth and in democracy.

Four out of five EU Citizens say that corruption is a major problem in their countries. This underlines the need for a firmer political commitment to fight corruption and the economic, social and political harm it causes. Bribes, kickbacks and illegal payments from individuals, businesses and organised crimes bypass the democratic process, hamper the fair operation of the economy and penalise the honest.
However, the fight against corruption is not the preserve of the industrialised countries. Nor can recipes that have worked in EU countries necessarily be applied to developing ones. More and more of the developing countries express their determination to combat corruption, echoing international initiatives, such as the Council Act of 26 May 1997.

In most developing countries, corruption is widespread and part of everyday life. Society has learned to live with it, maybe even considering it as an integral part of their culture.

Several mechanisms help to spread corruption and make it normal practice in these developing countries. In fact, it is the environment in which public servants and private actors operate that causes corruption. Public administration in developing countries is often bureaucratic and inefficient. A large number of complex, restrictive regulations coupled with inadequate controls are characteristic of developing countries where corruption tends to flourish. The underdevelopment of developing countries is conducive to corruption. In fact underdevelopment encourages corruption.

The European Union has become a main actor in the international area of fighting this phenomenon and has become a pioneer in setting up supranational legal instruments.

The European Union is the most important donor at word level, in particular as regards the aid to developing countries.

The European Union (EU) as a whole, including its Memebr States, is the leading development aid donor, accounting for
more than 50% of the worldwide total, worth € 53,1 billion in 2011.1

Just from this amount - Ladies and Gentlemen - the serious risk of fraud and corruption can be easily inferred. The grave institutional and political weakness of countries in which the financial amounts are invested should not be underestimated. The setting up of a sound system to monitor and control the way in which the European Union financial resources are spent becomes a basic need.

OLAF's mandate as regards the protection of the financial interest and the fight against corruption in third countries.

As you all know, OLAF's task is to fight fraud and corruption. This includes simultaneously the protection of the financial interest of the EU budget.

OLAF conducts investigations using its power to establish irregularities committed in relation to EU funds. These investigations are carried out in third countries, using a number of legal instruments which allows OLAF to have access to the relevant information in order to confirm these irregularities.

1 Annual Report 2011 on European Community's Development and External Assistance Policy and their implementation in 2011 (dating September 2011).

Fraud and Corruption

What constitutes fraud?

The main irregularities which OLAF detected are Double financing / invoicing and inflating invoices, Breach of the rules governing procurements process, Violation of the confidentiality duties by members of the panels, Direct contacts with service providers Subcontracting, Bribery, Multiple donors, Non execution of the works/ services, Misappropriations of funds

What is the link between fraud and corruption?
Corruption is necessary in order to conceal the fraud.
Fraud is necessary in order to recover the cost of corruption.

Or in other words: Corruption is an additional means to enable or conceal fraud in order to obtain a legally undue share of financial contributions from the EU budget. Investigations conducted by OLAF in third countries have demonstrated in a number of cases that behind fraud there are illicit behaviours perpetrated by public officials.

Consequently, fraud and corruption are interlinked criminal phenomena.
Corruption

Now, I will turn to the gist of fighting and preventing corruption from OLAF's investigative perspective.

I would like to illustrate with the help of some (anonymised) OLAF cases the financial impact of fraud and corruption in countries outside the EU being recipients of EU funding, highlighting the financial impact observed.

It is apparent from these examples that measuring the impact of corruption and bribery is a complex task which needs to be done in order to determine the actual damage of fraudulent actions.

Case 1: The mine sweeping case

A European NGO was paid to sweep mines in a country, which had been a theater of civil war.
The project financed the mine sweeping of areas with the
help of the necessary and appropriate technical equipment and staff plus the drawing of exact maps of the "cleared" areas.
The OLAF investigation established that the beneficiary NGO, in order to save expenditure, claimed bigger areas "swept", which were in fact not cleared. The inhumanity of such action (putting the lives of people at risk) is evident. Besides this, the aspect of financial damages ranks even as 2nd tier.
As the local national authorities in charge of supervising the project did not perform the relevant checks, the fraudulent activities could be concealed until OLAF investigated into the matter.
The case resulted in recovery of the financial damages to the Community budget and a notification of the NGO in the Early Warning System of the Commission for a period of time. As regards further aspects (i.e. the concealing, "non-performance of supervision by the national authorities") the OLAF investigation was not able to provide for additional findings. Often the conditions in the countries do not allow us to find the ultimate truth.

Case 2: The sterile laboratory and dispenser of medication

The aid funding in this case was channeled via an International Organization, which then provided so-called 'direct budgetary support' to a 3rd country, which eventually made use of NGOs, local and international companies delivering the construction of the facility, equipment and medication.
Fraud on such a scale requires the help of the local national authorities. But let us face the reality: OLAF does (like in other instances) not hold sufficiently effective powers of its own in order to investigate into the aspect of corruption in 3rd countries.
The International Organization, who was the first recipient of the funding, opted for an unusual/ new approach; they publish all their findings (incl. companies and names of public officials in charge) on the internet, aimed at putting pressure on individual actors and corruption prevention for future projects.
Now, how are we about to improve efficiency as regards the fight against corruption in third countries?

Enhanced communication flow between the services / players active inside of the EU Institutions.

Sharing of information with other financial donors (TR- AID database).

It is essential to get access to the information. It is the only way to fight against corruption. This implies to continue developing policies, e.g. as regards whistle blowers and informants.

The need to hold a strong institutional position as the cooperation will depend to a certain extent on the real cooperation when a case of fraud/corruption surface. A major commitment between the different political actors, so the European Parliament, the EEAS, the European Commission is required to support the efforts of OLAF. We should not underestimate the difficult conditions in which some investigations are carried out, including personal risk for the OLAF staff.

Conclusions

Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to close my presentation by stating that the fight against corruption has become a truly global effort. We all need to contribute – though in different settings – to criminalize the offering, promising or giving of bribes and to facilitate the confiscation and recovery of proceeds of corruption.