Introductory Level Dressage
Introductory Level Dressage is the very beginning of the horse and rider's development. The purpose of the Introductory Level is to introduce the rider and/or horse to the sport of dressage. To show understanding of riding the horse forward with a steady tempo into an elastic contact with independent steady hands and a correctly balanced seat. To show proper geometry of figures in the arena. It is also to confirm that the horse is supple and moves freely forward in a clear and steady rhythm, accepting contact with the bit.This level is done primarily at the walk and rising trot with some basic canter work being introduced in the Introductory Level Test C.

Introductory Level Requirements

The introductory level is comprised of 3 tests. Tests A & B include walk and trot work. Test C introduces a small amount of canter work. They contain mainly straight lines and 20m circles in medium walk, free walk and rising trot. Introductory test C has approximately 1/2 to 3/4 of a 20 meter canter circle in each direction. These movements are designed to show the horses ability to perform the required movements in a willing, supple way. The horse and rider are judged on the following:

Gaits (freedom and regularity) – Coefficient = X1
Impulsion (desire to move forward with suppleness of the back and steady tempo) Coefficient = X1
Submission (acceptance of steady contact, attention & confidence) – Coefficient = X2
Rider's position (keeping in balance with horse) – Coefficient = X1
Rider's effectiveness of the aids (corrent bend and preparation of transitions) – Coefficient = X1
Geometry and accuracy (correct size and shape of circles and turns) – Coefficient = X1
These elements are necessary as the horse and rider progress to more difficult levels.

Introductory Level Dressage Required Movements:

Medium walk
Free Walk
Working Trot – rising – 20 meter circles & changing of rein across the diagonal
Canter – on the 20 meter circle, Introductory Level C only
Halts – halt through walk