First Level Dressage
First Level Dressage continues to develop the horse's suppleness by adding lengthening of stride, 15m circles, single loops and leg yielding. These movements are also excellent indicators of the development of the horse's balance and throughness, as well as his ability for forward movement through thrust (i.e. – lengthening of stride). Here is where they develop the necessary skills, training and musculature to perform the advanced level movements of the higher levels.

First Level is comprised of 3 tests. Rider's may also choose to perform a Musical Freestyle at this level. These tests include walk, trot and canter work. They also contain leg yielding, single loops, lead changes through trot and smaller circles demonstrate the horse's balance and reponsiveness. These movements also illustrate the advancement of the horse's suppleness from the Training level. The horse and rider must demonstrate their ability to effectively perform these movements because they are the pre-cursor to the shoulder-in, travers, rein-back, shortening of stride and collection required at Second Level.

First Level Dressage Required Movements:

Medium walk
Free Walk 
Trot – sitting or rising 20 meter circles & changing of rein across the diagonal, working & lengthening of stride, 1/2 circle 10m, leg yield, and the stretch down circle
Canter – 15m circle, working & lengthening of stride, change of lead through trot
Halts – trot to halt

Freestyle Requirements – maximum of 5 minutes in length
Total of 240 points (120 pts each for technical & artistic marks)
Walk – 20m minimum continuous free walk
Walk – 20m minimum continuous medium walk
Trot – 10m circle or smaller (no smaller than 8m) – must be performed on each rein
Leg-Yield in trot – must be performed on each rein
Lengthen Stride in Trot
Canter – 15m circle or smaller (no smaller than 10m) – must be performed on each rein
Change of lead through trot
Lengthen Stride in Canter 
Halts – beginning & end of test
Forbidden movements: rein back, shoulder in, travers, renvers, half pass, flying changes, turn on haunches, canter or walk pirouette, piaffe, passage.
Allowed movements: Counter canter, zig zag leg yield, leg yield along the wall, lengthen canter on 20m circle, canter serpentine, simple change, walk-canter-walk-canter, halt-canter-halt, all figures – including circles – regardless of size, trot circle (10m or smaller), canter circle (15m or smaller).